Hello and welcome back to the course on
R programming and today we're going to
talk about ways to build the matrix. So
here I've got to where we left off in
the previous tutorial where we looked at
R studio and we've got the salary
table or the salary matrix now that we
know they're matrices. The salary matrix
for the top players, so let's have a look
and let's have a look around, let's look at
another one. Let's see what else do we
have.
We've got another one called games so
let's look at that.
So here you've got the games that these
same players played yeah and let's look at
another one.
We've got quite a fews, we won't look at
all of them right now, let's look at minutes
played and so you've got the number of
minutes each one of these players played
in these years.
Alright you can see Derrick Rose was
off for the whole season here with a
knee injury.
Anyway so it's a bit curious right?
How are these tables created? Let's go
have a look at the data,
let's go look at the script actually
that we were supplied with and let's see
how these tables came to be. So comments
comments comments and then we've got a
vector with seasons right? We've got a
vector of players which we both of them
we still, still have here. So there's
the players, there is the season vector and
players just has the names of the
players and seasons has the names of the
seasons in numbers. So basically, the
seasons has characters rather than
numbers and then we've got some more
vectors which are no longer here.
Interesting where did they go? Ok let's
have a look, we've got the salary so for
each one of the players we've got looks
what looks like their salaries in one
vector right? Instead of right away in
the table,
it's in one vector looks like it
starts from low to high so this was his
salary in 2005 and this is Kobe
Bryant's salary in 2014.
Ok that's same thing for the every player.
Alright and then how is the matrix
construction?
Alright salary is the matrix that we
call, so if I run this just the
highlighted bit
that's exactly what we're looking at the
salaries matrix, the salary matrix is the
result of a function called rbind and
rbind applied to all of these
vectors Kobe Bryant, salary Joe Johnson,
Lebron James and so on. So these vectors
are somehow being put into this matrix
by this rbind function, interesting.
Let's let's take note of that and then
what happens and then we've got RM so
what is RM do? RM basically is a function
to remove, so instead of clicking this
button here, to remove objects from your
work space to clear up you can actually
remove them one-by-one using this
function RM. So if you click if you type
in RM and then an object or comma
objects and like lots of objects
separated by commas you can remove them
like that so basically RM is cleaning up
these vectors.
That's why we don't see them, that make
sense if we have the matrix we don't
really need the vectors anymore and then
what do we have and then we have col
names salary seasons and row names,
salary player so apparently these two
vectors are being used to label the
column names and the row names interesting.
Ok so that's that's an interesting start
to this tutorial we've got, we've got kind
of working backwards. We can see how
these functions were used to create this
matrix and these vectors as well we're
used in this creation but we don't
actually know how it would works. Well now
that we've seen it,
let's go and talk about some of this
theory. I'll show you how these functions
work and then we'll come back and we'll
practice some of those on our own. I
think that'll be an interesting approach to
start. Alright let's get started, we talk
about building your first matrix.
Alright so here's the deal how do we
build a matrix? We have the data. How
do we put it in a matrix in R? Well the
first way to do it is use the matrix
function, now we didn't see an example of
that in the data set or in the
scriptural account just now and that's
because you won't be using the matrix
function that often.
What it does is it takes a vector and it
bends it into
like literally bends it into a matrix. So
let's say I have a vector of letters
from A, B, C, D, E and so on and I have 15
letters in there so if I try to put this
matrix you can see it's being bent, it's
like first three letters go here. So this
is how it works had a long vector of 15
elements and then it's like put the
first three in here then bend it put it
in here bend it put it in here bend it,
it's like a snake and it will always
populate starting with the first column
and popular the column then I'll go to the
second column and so on. Unless you specify
and we'll see this, unless we specify
a parameter which we'll tell it to bend
the vector like that and the reason why
this function is not that often used is
because how often are you required to
take a vector and put into matrix?
Usually matrices arising in different
ways either you get from a file or or
use one of these functions.
The second way is to use a function
called rbind and that's exactly what
we saw in that script that we're looking at just
now and rbind function does is as
you just saw, it just blinds these
vectors. Let's do that again, it was
pretty cool animation boom boom boom
right? So rbind takes a vector, they
have to be of the same length of course
otherwise you can't create a matrix if
they're not in same length but basically
rbind takes the first vector and
attaches the second below at third vector
and so on and create a matrix like that
and the next function is C bind. Can you
guess what it does? Exactly, C-bind
connects columns into a vector. So if you have
five columns of length 3 in this case, so
bam bam bam, so first, second, third,
fourth and fifth and there we go, so that's the
three main ways of creating matrices of
course you can get one from a file and
we'll explore importing data further
down in the course but if you want to
create a matrix on in your script then
these are the three main ones.
Alright, so let's go practice some of these
things.
Alright so what do we have? We've got
salary games we don't need any of that
anymore,
let's try to create our own matrix right?
So first we're going to learn how to use
the matrix function even though we're
not going to be using it that much
let's to learn how to use it. So if I run
a question mark matrix, what we will see
is that matrix requires some elements
some parameters, the first parameter is
data and by default is N/A because
there's no data there at the moment
and we need to pause it. Basically it's
asking for a vector of values that will
be turned into matrix, then it's asking
for the number of rows and the number of
columns and to be passed. So you basically
tell matrix the function what kind of
matrix you want to build, how many rows?
How many columns? And then you've got the
false parameter. It tells the function
whether you want to populate your matrix
by rows or by columns, by default as you can
see is it's false so that means that you want
to populate by rows.
Ok, so moving back here, let's go ahead
and get some data first.
My data is 1 to 20 and so my data,
if I run that, I've got a vector of 20
numbers. Now if I want to put that vector
into matrix I can bend it into matrix
using the matrix function my data,
I am passing the data to the function
then I want to call the number give it
the number 4 so you can see here past
the data, then the number of rows
that you want I want four rows and then
the number of columns that you want. I
want five columns in the matrix so it's
important that these two, if you multiply
them equal, they equal to the length of the vector
because that's the vector has to fit
into the matrix basically. So if I run that
and I call A then you'll see, I've got
matrix here and it's been populated like
we saw in the tutorial right? In the
presentation, it's going one, two, three, four
then it's being bent like that five, six,
seven, eight so it's been populated like a
snake going up and down up and down.
Alright so that is our matrix and as you
can see here the indices are just as we
discussed in the previous tutorial.
So it's not just one, two, three, four but
it's actually one square brackets comma
nothing two, square two inside square
brackets comma nothing and so on and
for the columns it's the opposite way around so
that's just how R represents indices and
also telling you that maybe if you want
to get this whole row, you just put a in
front of any one of these and you just
type that out or if you want to get the whole column A and then square bracket
comma 3 I'll give you this whole column.
So for instance, there's done exercise, how
do we get to number 10?
Can you get to the number-10 using
indexes, indices yes we can, we just say A
two and three as you can see it becomes
a no-brain all you have to do is look
here,
ok it's in the second row, that tells you
that's the second row and that tells you in the third column.
Run that, you get the number
10, beautiful.
Ok so let's create another matrix but
this time we'll do the same exact thing
so we'll copy that
but at the end we'll say by row equals
true. So you can just put the letter T or
type in the whole world it's up to you
and the important thing to note here is
that we're not creating a different type
of matrix, the matrix still going to be a
four by five so it's not that we're
going to create a five by four matrix. It's
going to have 4 rows, 5 columns just like
this one.
The data is going to be the same, it's
just that the data is going to be
populated into the matrix differently.
Let's have a look, so if we run that,
you'll see that the data goes one,
two, three, four and then bends this way
six, seven, eight, nine, ten bends 11, 12, 13,
14, 15 bends over here. So it's like a
snake going left to right this time.
So that is what we created using the
same function but with a different by
row parameter and here's a challenge
for you, if you pause this video try to
get to the number 10 in this matrix now.
Can you do it? I'm sure you can, so to get
to the number 10 it's in a different
position now you need to take the second
row and the fifth column. So let's try
that be 2nd, 5th, as you can see number 10,
alright beautiful. The other function
we wanted to discuss is the R-bind
function, now I'm not going to bring up
the help far bind because it's a very
simple function and as you'll see
we don't need the help manual. So all we
do is a couple pictures so let's create
three vectors and then will bind them
into matrices. R1 was going to be a
vector and let's make it a character
vector for a change and what I want to
say here is I'm going to say I am happy.
Why am I happy because I'm sharing this
knowledge with some awesome people
thank you so much for taking this course.
I hope you're learning a lot. Then second
vector is what a day is being great day
and R3 is going to be just a vector of
numbers, so let's say C-123 right? So we
have three vectors, let's create them and
we want to put them into a matrix. The
matrix is going to be called C. How do we put
three vectors into matrix if you wanna
bind them row-by-row, if we want them
to be the rows.
Well we just say R1, we say R-bind and
then we say R1, R2 and R3. If you run this
now, you'll see that here we go we've got
the matrix awesome. I'm happy what a day,
1,2,3 and you can see the 1, 2, 3 are no
longer numbers of they're characters
because you cannot mix different types
inside a matrix just like inside a
vector, so the character numbers were
converted to characters automatic. Now
let's do the same thing for C-bind
right? We want,
let's make some space. Let's start by
creating vector C-1, we'll just create two
vectors, so there we go C-1 and C-2 is
going to be minus 1 to minus 5. Alright some
negative numbers, now the matrix D is
going to be C-bind, C-1, C-2 right and now if
I called D you'll see I've got 1, 2, 3, 4, 5
minus 1. So I kind of merge those two
vectors together into matrix like
virtually like that. Okay that brings us
to the end of today's tutorial and to
quickly recap, we talked about three
functions today we talked about the
matrix function which bends a vector
into a matrix and this function you won't
be using it that much but still it's
important to know about it and know how
it works.
The R-bind function which binds
vectors
into a matrix, a row by row and this C
bind function which binds vectors into
matrix column by column. So that's all
for today, hopefully you will have some
time to practice these and I highly
encourage you to do so just create some
of your own matrices for instance just
one for each function will be enough, if
can do two for each function, that would be
fantastic!
Just to make this knowledge sink in
and next time we will proceed with the
next topic and I look to seeing you in the next
tutorial. Until then, happy coding!